chore(claude): setup CLAUDE.md for the monorepo. Setup mcp for kona (#18824)
ethereum-optimism/optimism: AGENTS.md

# AGENTS.md

This file provides guidance to AI agents when working with code in this repository.

## Repository Overview

> This is the Optimism monorepo containing core components of the OP Stack - the decentralized software stack that powers Optimism and forms the backbone of OP Mainnet and the Superchain. The codebase is primarily Go with Solidity smart contracts and a Rust subproject (Kona).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the Optimism monorepo containing core components of the OP Stack - the decentralized software stack that powers Optimism and forms the backbone of OP Mainnet and the Superchain. The codebase is in Go and Rust with Solidity smart contracts.
```

## Build Commands

### Initial Setup
```bash
# Install mise dependency manager (required)
mise trust mise.toml
mise install

# Initialize submodules
make submodules
```

### Building
```bash
# Build everything (Go + contracts)
make build

# Build only Go components
make build-go

# Build only contracts
make build-contracts

# Build specific components
make op-node
make op-batcher
make op-proposer
make op-challenger
make cannon
make op-program
```

### Linting
```bash
# Go linting
make lint-go
make lint-go-fix

# Solidity linting (from packages/contracts-bedrock)
just lint
just lint-fix

> ```

Reviewer: Do we have a lint just target for Rust?

### Testing

**Go tests:**
```bash
# Run all Go tests
make go-tests

# Run tests with short flag (faster)
make go-tests-short

# Run tests for a specific package (use the package's justfile)
# Each package has its own test target that handles dependencies
cd op-node && just test
cd op-batcher && just test
```

**Solidity tests:**
```bash
cd packages/contracts-bedrock

# Run all contract tests with the faster 'lite' build mode enabled
just test-dev

# Run a specific test
just test-dev --match-test testFunctionName

# Run tests with verbosity
just test-dev -vvv

# Run upgrade path tests
FORK_BASE_CHAIN=mainnet \

> FORK_OP_CHAIN=base \

Reviewer: the `base` here may be confusing without having the context that `base` is actually the name of an OP Stack chain 😅 could set set OPM here instead (don't know its identifier)?

ETH_RPC_URL=<rpc-url-here> \
just test-upgrade
```

**E2E tests:**
```bash
cd op-e2e

# Prerequisites: E2E tests require contract artifacts and cannon prestates.
# Run this first if artifacts are missing:
make pre-test

# Action tests (deterministic, synchronous)
make test-actions

# System tests (full system integration)
make test-ws
```

## Architecture Overview

> ### Core Go Services (op-*)

Reviewer: we now have a few Rust crates starting with `op-`. Let's remove here and just list the Go packages.

```suggestion
### Go OP Stack components
```

- **op-node**: Rollup consensus-layer client. Builds, relays, and verifies the canonical L2 chain. Communicates with execution layer (op-geth) via Engine API.
- **op-batcher**: Submits L2 transaction batches to L1 for data availability.
- **op-proposer**: Submits L2 output roots to L1 for withdrawals and dispute games.
- **op-challenger**: Dispute game challenge agent for fault proofs.

> - **op-supervisor**: Monitors chains and determines cross-chain message safety for interop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **op-supervisor**: Deprecated. Monitors chains and determines cross-chain message safety for interop.
- **op-supernode**: Supernode for next Interop iteration. Manages multiple op-nodes of interoperable chains.

```

- **op-program**: Fault proof program that runs in the MIPS VM for onchain verification.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**op-service**: Shared common functionality.
**op-core**: Core protocol functionality. In the process of receiving most logic inside `op-node/rollup`. Currently very light, but new shared protocol code should go here.

```

### Smart Contracts (packages/contracts-bedrock)

Located in `packages/contracts-bedrock/src/`. Key contract categories:
- `L1/`: L1 contracts (OptimismPortal, SystemConfig, bridges)
- `L2/`: L2 predeploys (CrossDomainMessenger, L2ToL1MessagePasser)
- `cannon/`: MIPS emulator contracts for fault proofs
- `dispute/`: Dispute game contracts

### Cannon (Fault Proofs)

Cannon is an onchain MIPS instruction emulator enabling fault proofs:
- `cannon/`: MIPS emulator CLI and `mipsevm` Go implementation
- Runs `op-program` one instruction at a time for dispute resolution
- Contracts in `packages/contracts-bedrock/src/cannon/`

> ### Kona (Rust Components)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Rust OP Stack components
```
and list all the crates we already migrated

The `kona/` directory contains Rust implementations of OP Stack components. See `kona/CLAUDE.md` for Kona-specific guidance:
```bash
cd kona
just build-native  # Build
just test          # Test
just lint-native   # Lint
```

### Testing Infrastructure

- **op-e2e/actions/**: Deterministic state-transition tests with mock clock. Tests run synchronously without parallelism.
- **op-e2e/system/**: Full system integration tests (deprecated for new tests).
- **op-acceptance-tests/**: New acceptance test framework.
- **kurtosis-devnet/**: Kurtosis-based devnet for testing.

> ## Solidity Style Guide

Reviewer: Should this really be in the top-level AGENTS.md? It would save context if it's only in `packages/contracts-bedrock/AGENTS.md` so any task that doesn't touch the contracts doesn't need to read this info.

- Function parameters: prefix with underscore (`_amount`)
- Return arguments: suffix with underscore (`result_`)
- Immutables: `SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE`, `internal`, with hand-written getter
- Custom errors: `ContractName_ErrorDescription`

### Testing
- Test function naming: `test_functionName_reason_succeeds/reverts`
- Test contracts: `TargetContract_FunctionName_Test`

### Upgradeability
- Contracts should extend `Initializable` and use `reinitializer(initVersion())`
- Call `_disableInitializers()` in constructor
- All non-library contracts must implement `ISemver` with `version()`
- `immutable` variables are discouraged in upgradeable contracts

## Key Configuration Files

- `mise.toml`: Tool versions (Go 1.24.10, Rust 1.92.0, Foundry, etc.)
- `go.mod`: Go module definition
- `packages/contracts-bedrock/foundry.toml`: Foundry configuration
- `docker-bake.hcl`: Docker build configuration

## Development Workflow

1. PRs should target the `develop` branch
2. Use `just pr` (in `packages/contracts-bedrock`) to run all contracts checks prior to submitting contract changes
3. Use `mise install` to ensure correct tool versions
4. Run `make build` after switching branches

> 5. Use Conventional Commits format for commit messages

Reviewer: This is debatable 😜 Many engineers, including me, prefer the Linux/geth style commits: `<scope>: <desc>`, and don't add the `<type>(...)`. We don't have automated release tooling that reads the commit types. And probably nowadays an AI would be better at grouping individual commits than the manual type prefix.
